---
layout: post
title: Comparing, Contrasting, and Unifying the Discrete Time and Continuous Time Fourier Transforms
---

This post is perhaps more for me than it is for all of you, but I hope some of you out there might find this useful.

## Transform Definitions

### Classical Definitions

The (classical) Continuous Time Fourier Transform (cCTFT) $${\cal F}_{\mathbb{R}}$$ of a function $$f:\mathbb{R} \rightarrow \mathbb{R}$$ is given by

$$ {\cal X}_{\mathbb{R}}\{f\}(\omega) := \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} f(t) e^{-i \omega t} \; dt. $$

The (classical) Discrete Time Fourier Transform (cDTFT) $${\cal F}_{\mathbb{Z}}$$ of a function $$f:\mathbb{Z} \rightarrow \mathbb{R}$$ is usually given by

$$ {\cal X}_{\mathbb{Z}}\{f\}(\omega) := \sum_{t=-\infty}^{\infty} f(t) e^{-i \omega t}. $$

### Moving Towards a Unified Definition

The cDTFT definition feels and looks correct, since it looks exactly like the continuous time definition, but with the integral replaced by a sum. I would tend to agree, but I study time scales, which seeks to unify the continuous and discrete under one analytic framework. One issue I have with this definition is that the domain of both transforms is the same: $$\omega$$ can be any real number. In reality, the cCTFT and cDTFT can both be thought of as being evaluated on the cusp between the unstable region and the stable region of the Laplace Transform and the Z-Transform, respectively. This means the domain of the cCTFT is $$\mathbb{R}$$, as we already have, but the domain of the cDTFT should really be the unit circle. Let's make this more explicit by defining the cDTFT in terms of the variable $$e^{i \omega}$$, which is always on the unit circle.

$$ {\cal X}_{\mathbb{Z}}\{f\}(e^{i \omega}) = \sum_{t=-\infty}^{\infty} f(t) \frac{1}{( e^{i \omega} )^t }. $$

Now, the exponential function in the denominator of the integrand above is looking like the [delta exponential](http://timescalewiki.org/index.php/Delta_exponential) on the integers, but without the shift of plus one. Define the new variable $$\xi = (e^{i \omega} -1)/i$$. Notice since $$e^{i \omega}$$ is always on the unit circle, $$\xi$$ is always on the unit circle shifted left by one, then rotated by $$-\pi/2$$ radians (this is the same as saying $$\xi$$ is on the unit circle shifted up by one unit) This leads to the same cDTFT in terms the new variable $$\xi$$,

$$ {\cal X}_{\mathbb{Z}}\{f\}(\xi) = \sum_{t=-\infty}^{\infty} f(t) \frac{1}{(1+i \xi)^{t}}.$$

Notice nothing has really changed from the orginal cDTFT definition. I have simply recontextualized the definition and made one change of variable (notice $$ 1+ i \xi = e^{i \omega}$$, so the denominator has remained the same). 

Now, for reasons that will be revealed later, I actually want to alter the definition of the cCTFT and cDTFT to arrive at the (unified) Continuous Time Fourier Transform (uCTFT) and (unified) Discrete Time Fourier Transform (uDTFT)

### Unified Continuous Time Fourier Transform Definition

For the cCTFT, let $$\xi = \omega$$ and define the uCTFT of $$f$$, $${\cal F}_{\mathbb{R}}$$, as

$${\cal F}_{\mathbb{R}}\{f\}(\xi) := {\cal X}_{\mathbb{R}}\{f\}(\xi).$$

That is, the cCTFT and uCTFT are exactly the same, except I am renaming $$\omega$$ as $$\xi$$ (thrilling, I know).

### Unified Discrete Time Fourier Transform Definition

For the cDTFT, let $$\xi = (e^{i \omega} - 1)/i$$ and define the uDTFT of $$f$$, $${\cal F}_{\mathbb{Z}}$$, as

$$
\begin{aligned}
{\cal F}_{\mathbb{Z}}\{f\}(\xi) & := \frac{1}{1+i \xi} {\cal X}_{\mathbb{Z}}\{f\}(\xi) \\
                   & = \sum_{t=-\infty}^{\infty} f(t) \frac{1}{(1+i \xi)^{t+1}}. 
\end{aligned}
$$

I have added in a forward shift to preserve operational properties.

## Operational Properties

The differential operator of $$\mathbb{R}$$ is the derivative. The differential operator I want to use on $$\mathbb{Z}$$ is the forward difference $$\Delta f(t):= f(t+1)-f(t).$$ There is a  key property that uCTFT and uDTFT share with respect to their respective differential operators.

### uCTFT of a Derivative

Using integration by parts and the fact that acceptable signals must go to zero as time approaches infinity in either direction gives us

$$ 
\begin{aligned}
{\cal F}_{\mathbb{R}}\{f'\}(\xi) & = \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} f'(t) e^{-i \xi t} \; dt. \\
                                 & = f(t) e^{-i \xi t} \rvert_{-\infty}^{\infty} - \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} f(t) - i \xi e^{-i \xi t} \; dt \\
                                 & = 0 + i \xi \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} f(t) e^{-i \xi t} \; dt \\
                                 & = i \xi {\cal F}_{\mathbb{R}}\{f\}(\xi).
\end{aligned}
$$

### uCTFT of a Forward Difference

Note that 
$$
\begin{aligned}
\frac{1}{1+i \xi} ({\cal F}_{\mathbb{Z}}\{\Delta f\}(\xi) - i \xi {\cal F}_{\mathbb{Z}}\{f\}(\xi)) &= \sum_{t=-\infty}^{\infty} \frac{(f(t+1) - f(t)) - i \xi f(t)}{(1+i \xi)^{t+2}} \\
& = \sum_{t=-\infty}^{\infty} \frac{f(t+1)-(1+i \xi) f(t)}{(1+i \xi)^{t+2}} \\
& = \sum_{t=-\infty}^{\infty} \frac{f(t+1)}{(1+i \xi)^{t+2}} - \frac{f(t)}{(1+i \xi)^{t+1}} \\
& = \sum_{t=-\infty}^{\infty} \frac{f(t+1)}{(1+i \xi)^{t+2}} - \sum_{t=-\infty}^{\infty} \frac{f(t)}{(1+i \xi)^{t+1}} \\
& = {\cal F}_{\mathbb{Z}}\{f\}(\xi) - {\cal F}_{\mathbb{Z}}\{f\}(\xi) \\
& = 0
\end{aligned}
$$

Thus $${\cal F}_{\mathbb{Z}}\{\Delta f\}(\xi) = i \xi {\cal F}_{\mathbb{Z}}\{f\}(\xi).$$ This matches how the unified transform interacted with the differential operator on $$\mathbb{R}$$

Okay, I have to be honest here that we didn't need the extra $$(1+i \xi)$$ in the denominator for this to work out on $$\mathbb{Z}$$. But, the shift forward is absolutely essential when trying to make this work on arbitrary time domains.

## Domains

The uCTFT is defined on the real line. The uDTFT is defined on the unit circle shifted up by one, so it is tangent to the real axis and in the upper-half plane. 

Let's think about the time domain $$h \mathbb{Z} = \{...-3h, -2h, -h, 0 , h, 2h, 3h, ...\}.$$ For $$s \in h \mathbb{Z}$$, one can perform the change of variables $$t= s/h$$ and perform a uDTFT. However, looking at the domain of this transformation in the orginal domain, we see the domain of the transform is the disc of radius $$1/h$$ that is tangent to the real axis and in the upper-half plane. This lets us see a beautiful unity in our approach. As $$h \rightarrow 0$$, the domain of the Fourier transform becomes a bigger and bigger circle, so big that the bottom part of the circle becomes almost a straight line -- the real axis. This shows that the domain of the uDTFT becomes the domain of the cDTFT in the limit as $$h \rightarrow 0$$ (which means we're making a better and better discrete-time approximation of continuous time). 

<video controls autoplay loop muted>
  <source src="videos/circle.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  This browser does not display the video tag.
</video>